---
title      : "The death and life of 'operative' history"
subtitle   : "Dialogues between historiography and design theory in contemporary Italy"
author     : "Pedro Paulo Palazzo"
date       : 2020-02-28
categories:
- typology
tags: 
- Italian school of procedural typology
- typology
- new classicism
- postmodernism
- Manfredo Tafuri
- Aldo Rossi
- Saverio Muratori
- Gabriele Tagliaventi
suppress-bibliography: true
---

![Gianfranco Caniggia. Typological analysis plate of the City of Como,
1963. [@caniggia:1984lettura]](fig/como-ii.png)

> This summarized argument will be presented at the [6^th^ meeting of
> the European Architectural History
> Network](https://eahn2020.eca.ed.ac.uk/2020/03/18/692/) in Edinburgh,
> 2--5 June, 2021, in the session *Split cultures --- New dialogues:
> Research in architectural history and theory,* chaired by Brigitte
> SÃ¶lch and Carsten Ruhl.

The struggle for rigour in architectural scholarship in post-war Italy
resulted in an engaging and diverse body of argumentative and exemplary
writings by well-known authors such as Saverio Muratori (1910--1973),
Aldo Rossi (1931--1997), and Manfredo Tafuri (1935--1994). Their often
conflicting positions on the craft of architectural history, its
relationship to design practice, and the establishment of disciplinary
parameters for either history or design, set the foundational arguments
for much of the international debate around these themes.

The validity of extracting 'operative' knowledge from history for use in
architectural and urban practice is one among many debates in which
these architects engaged [@purini:2013saverio, 62]. This controversy is
expressed most clearly in their differing attitudes towards typology as
either an art historical device or a theory of the architectural
planning process.

The Italian universe of typological studies is probably best known
through Aldo Rossi's idiosyncratic definition of the concept, in *The
Architecture of the City,* as the study of 'constants' underlying urban
and architectural 'facts' and discernible in them
[@rossi:2006architettura, 33]. Saverio Muratori's contribution, on the
other hand, is restricted to the technical domain of urban morphology
[@cataldi:2013debito, 14], to a great extent due to his ostracism from
the mainstream critical panorama, brought about by his ideological
condemnation at the hands of Bruno Zevi and Manfredo Tafuri
[@pigafetta:1990saverio, 29]. Tafuri himself towers tall as one of the
most acclaimed architectural historians of the post--1968 era, not the
least for his combative---though at times inconsistent---argument for
the critical autonomy of architectural history outside the professional
scope of the architectural discipline [@tafuri:1988teorie, 268].

Nowadays, however, and especially outside Italy, the critical
perspectives around these three architects are mostly cut off from one
another, being concerned with specific subfields in research and
practice, the scopes of which have been increasingly delimited to
reflect their respective methodological and ideological *partis pris.*
This segmentation of theories and scholarship influenced by Muratori,
Rossi, and Tafuri is not only a misrepresentation of their frequent
engagement with one another's theories [As evidenced by
@moschini:2013saverio; @petruccioli:1998exoteric; @lobsinger:2006new59;
@murro:2019storia]; it also obscures the claim put forward by each one
of them to a systematic representation of and agency on the urban
environment.

The confrontation of Tafuri's critical underpinnings for an autonomous
and critical history of architecture [@biraghi:2005progetto] with
Muratori's and Rossi's methods for the operative appropriation of
historical research in design exposes the overarching conflicts in world
view among them, of course, but beneath these differences certain
fundamental affinities show through, evidencing how they partake in the
major intellectual and political themes of their age. These affinities
have not, however, been carried on by their disciples and interpreters
as clearly as their differences. This has caused Muratori's, Rossi's,
and Tafuri's work to become somewhat abstract and disconnected from the
role they all expected their critique to play in the transformation of
urban planning [@tafuri:1980sfera, 24]. In other words, what they have
in common is they intended not so much to propose a general theory of
architectural form---for Muratori was sceptical of formal rules, Rossi
was sceptical of generalisations, and Tafuri was sceptical of
theorising---, but rather to look at the contemporary city as a
*process* to be acted upon politically and technically
[@muratori:1959studiIX, 132].

In light of their common goal of contributing critically to processes
rather than objects, one can begin to draw a clearer picture of their
affinities and conflicts, putting the acrid debates of the 1960s and 70s
in the long-term perspective of how their legacies have been, and could
be, carried on throughout the evolving ideological configurations of the
architectural profession. To this end, the study of the direct 'lineage'
of the second and third generation of Muratori's disciples
[@cataldi:2002saverio6], as well as of other practitioners and scholars
influenced by Rossi's poetics of the city and by Tafuri's critical
historiography, offers an overview of what rigorous architectural
scholarship can look like in the present day. This loosely defined group
of architects may be, for starters, grouped in an 'Italian school of
typology' of sorts.

This 'school' shall be defined, initially, by the shared scope of
objects and methods pertaining to the architectural discipline, reaching
back to the superimposition of idealist philosophy and socialist
politics that was pervasive in post-war Italian architectural circles
[@leach:2007manfredo, 47]. This disciplinary framing understands
architecture to be not a specific set of objects, real or potential, but
a process of bringing about change in the urban fabric; conversely,
history is not envisaged as a coherent narrative to be 'found', but as a
collection of fragments of which to make sense in a piecemeal fashion
[@zevi:1974architettura, 55].

On top of this common ground, providing a shared understanding of the
profession's role in the contemporary world, a second level of analysis
reveals an implicit awareness of the conflicts between historiographical
critique, ever bent on scattering and reassembling the fragments in
infinite ways [@tafuri:1977storico, 17], and operative synthesis,
demanding agreement, if limited and provisional, on reconstructed
'memories' of the urban process to be acted upon critically
[@stoppani:2010lhistoire, 220].

The cracks developing from these conflicts become rifts, on a third
level, between the 'modernist' disciples of Muratori
[@caniggia:1984introduzione, 12]---among them Gianfranco Caniggia, Gian
Luigi Maffei, Giancarlo Cataldi, and Giuseppe Strappa---and the
'traditionalists' [@rosponi:2004new] or 'new classicists'
[@papadakis:1990new]---such as Pier Carlo Bontempi, Gabriele
Tagliaventi, and Cristiano Rosponi---loosely inspired by the figurative
character of Rossi's later work. This cleaving of the 'Italian school'
hinges on the decomposition of the urban 'organism', in the work of
living practitioners, according to diverging hierarchies of abstract and
figurative elements [An example of conflicting hierarchies is patent in
the ancillary role ascribed to construction and detailing in
@caniggia:1987progetto]. This conflict exposes conceptual weaknesses in
the theories supporting typological design, in terms of the choices
practitioners make when appropriating and making sense of urban
fragments.

Thus, the analysis turns back for a final look at how critical
historiography addresses the shortcomings of operativity. By looking at
the interaction of historical scholarship and design practice in the
work of architects who combine both activities [See, for example,
@tagliaventi:2007manuale; @tagliaventi:2000tecniche], the theoretical
assumptions linking both fields become clear. The typological
contradictions between the 'historic city' strictly
defined---preindustrial urbanism [@caniggia:2008lettura, 23]---and the
urban fabric of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
appears as an unresolved conflict  in the methods and judgements of
'modernists' from the Muratorian school [@strappa:1989tradizione] and of
traditionalists alike [@tagliaventi:2006european18].

